REVIEWER 1

General Comments
My biggest issue with the paper as it currently exists is that the choice of reward function is not well justified within the paper itself. The manuscript describes a complex reward function in which the traversal cost of a tile decays each time the agent enters the tile. I see how this will induce a rigid behavioral policy within an agent and penalize it for exploration. What is not well explained is WHY THIS IS AN ECOLOGICALLY VALID REWARD FUNCTION IN THIS CASE. As the manuscript notes, the typical source of canalization is from the training process adjusting the parameters of the model itself, not from the external reward function. RL algorithms tend to naturally produce greedy policies, and much of the research in the field over its history has been devoted to designing algorithms which optimally balance exploration and exploitation throughout the training process. My recommendation would be to FOCUS ON CANALIZATION THAT IS CONNECTED TO THE INTRINSIC DYNAMICS OF LEARNING ITSELF. IF, HOWEVER, THE FOCUS REMAINS ON THE DESIGN OF THE REWARD FUNCTION, THEN THAT CHOICE SHOULD BE THOROUGHLY JUSTIFIED AND DEFENDED WITHIN THE PAPER. It may also be valuable to design a non-canalization-inducing reward function which can be compared against the canalizing one. This could make more clear the pathological nature of the canalized policies by having a “healthy” policy to compare against.

> PARTLY DONE. Clingo. 

Added some things:

- Short appeal to niche construction
- Explanation that without this pressure, the agent hypercanalized too quickly
- Discussion now talks about alternatives we could have taken (think it's just missing a straight up "oh, we could have just messed around with our parameters and probably done this without it, but we did like niche construction and it seemed more realistic when we're talking about HRL and foraging about for rewards")


Some things we can do here. (1) describe with citations how it is rewarding for animals to follow the same path. Perhaps skilled performance literature. Less costly to do something the same way again. (2) more importantly, discuss what happened when we did NOT have the path penalty. In that case it hyperfixates and only learns the strategy of spiraling and hypercanalizing immediately on its first source of reward and does not explore.
    - Suggest really thinking about the ref's comments here. Are there ways we could have gotten this type of thing using simpler reward and other exploitation params in an RL algorithm?
    - We could have added environmental constraints where it's just harder to move up a groove, but that is effectively the same as traversal cost

EACH OF US THINK / DISCUSS

Specific Comments

Page 3 (Footnote): Deep CANALs is the Juliani et al. (2024) model, while CANAL is the Carhart-Harris et al. (2023) model.

> Done. Removed footnote in included direct distinction between models in the main text.

Page 4: It would be helpful if the Introduction ended with a discussion of the hypothesis being tested in the paper and an allusion to what the findings of the paper are. More generally, the paper is lacking a clear hypothesis that is being evaluated. Is the hypothesis that the decanalization procedure will produce specific improvements in model performance? If so, that should be stated explicitly. 

> Done. The final  paragraph of the intro has been revised in accordance with this suggestion. 

Page 4: Why was a 3D environment chosen? All of the experiments take place on a 2D plane, so it would seem that height is not relevant.

> Done. We have added the following note: "Though it is a 3D tool, the simulation itself is essentially a 2D planar simulation."

Page 5: The PPO algorithm should be properly cited here, and in doing so there is no need for a detailed explanation of how the algorithm works.

> Done

Page 5: There is no description of the architecture of the model itself. It is not even clear that the models being trained are neural networks, as all that is described are the Python and PyTorch versions. Please include these details, as well as what parameter choices were used for training (this can be included in an appendix).

> Done. See appendix.

Page 7: I am not clear on the action space available to the agent. Presumably the agent moves around the environment, yet movement actions are not described. In fact, it sounds based on the current wording of the paper that the agent can only ever take a single action, which is to rotate its angle of view by a single degree? This cannot be the case, as then there would be nothing for the agent to learn. Please clarify this.

> Done. The main text now describes one continuous steering dimension with automatic forward movement. The action is not explicitly clamped; the confirmed runtime yaw multiplier is 2.5. Forward speed follows the recovered frame-delta formula in the appendix.

Page 10: It is claimed that it is a normal practice to provide “disproportionally more reward the closer it gets to the target.” There should be a citation for this claim and the claim itself should be better justified or made more specific, because as currently stated it is not true. In cases where reaching the target induces a terminal state, a pathological policy in which the agent gets ever closer but never reaches the target can be learned.

> TODO. Clingo thinks this was done and will check.

Page 10: It is claimed that positive reinforcement is more effective than negative reinforcement. Please provide a citation for this claim.

> Done. Went ahead and removed comment, as it's not pertinent.

Page 11: The choice of the Negative Feedback agent as a baseline should be better justified. For example, why shouldn’t a Positive Feedback agent also be used as a baseline? Or why shouldn’t a more traditional non-homeostatic RL agent be included as a baseline? Currently it feels quite arbitrary, and given the nature of the reward function, it is not surprising that this agent suffers the pathologies that it does.

> Done. Added more explanation after introducing Negative Feedback as a contrast (also more clearly described as a contrast--a grounding sanity check--vs a primary measure)

Page 12: It is not clear what “60 seconds” means in this context, as wall clock time is arbitrarily related to timesteps within an RL simulation.

> Done. Replaced the 60-second claim with the recovered 20 Hz training timestep, 1028-step cap (51.4 simulation seconds at one step per frame), 100-second Blueprint timer, and |h| > 150 termination threshold. Evaluation phases are reported in ticks without importing the training timestep.

Page 12: As currently described, the decanalization intervention feels somewhat arbitrary. Why, for example, was the “rate of canalization increased threefold” in the intervention? Why not twofold, or not at all? It would be valuable to see how adjusting this parameter influences the results of the simulations.

> TODO: May need a sensitivity analysis where we try a few different parameters and show they are all directionally similar. 

Page 15: The tables are somewhat difficult to interpret. It would be helpful if the different metrics were more clearly explained beforehand. 

> Done. We have moved the descriptions we had to a table and expanded and improved on those descriptions. We also moved the pre and during intervention differences to an appendix, to keep the focus on the main comparison and further clarify the results.

Furthermore, it would be valuable to demonstrate more clearly what kind of policies are learned by agents within the first condition. To what extent do they learn the task? What pathologies of behavior arise? How much might the agents be in need of decanalization?

> Jeff. They hypercanalize on the rewards. Because of that they are not very good at maximizing rewards. They hypercanalize too quickly. Jeff will add some signposted version of this in the analysis.

Page 16: The authors find differences in the performance of the control conditions which they describe as a “false positive.” This may suggest that the study is underpowered in some way.

> TODO. Clingo. Will run more sims in case these go away. If not change how characterized.

REVIEWER 1 (DISCUSSION SECTION)

Page 19: Having a stronger hypothesis being tested would help make the summary section more clear. Right now it reads as a list of various findings, and it is not clear as a reader what to make of them, or what their relevance is to the larger conversations the paper is positioning itself as contributing to. 

> Done. (or being done in general w/ other revisions)

A related question is: “why did this need to be simulated at all?” Are the results predictable given the algorithms and reward functions? It is important for the authors to demonstrate that they discovered something that wouldn’t have been known beforehand.

> Mostly done. Added more detail in discussion. Still remaining: Are the results predictable, given the conditions

Page 19: The authors provide “niche-construction” as a motivation for the reward function in the discussion. This should be expanded upon and presented much earlier in the paper. It again gets to the question of justifying the design of the simulation.

> Done. Small intro section and now explained as being expressed in traversal costs.

Page 20: The authors state that the HRL agent did not achieve an optimal policy given the environment. It would be helpful to know why this was the case. Could it be that the correct learning parameters were not used, or is there something more intrinsic to the design of the environment that prevented an optimal policy from being learned?

> Clingo. The environment is just so complex.  In informal study human actors manually controlling the agent have produced better performance (author 1 has done it). Our goal was comparative rather than to maximally fine tune the RL. In principle an agent could do much better. We are not using state of the art industrial RL on a cluster. Cite atari results, which required large computers and teams of expert engineers and still did not outperform huamns. What we did was out of the box RL which was fine relative to our goals.

Page 20: The discussion is a place for engaging with the wider literature and positioning the results of the paper within that literature. Right now the discussion is mostly a reflection on the results. It would be valuable to expand it.

> Mostly done. Added some Saffron. Might want to nod to Pivotal Mental States too.

Page 28 and 29: These figures are difficult to read. It would be helpful to significantly increase the font size of the figures. Another suggestion would be to have a single “hero figure” in which the most important result of the paper is plainly visually presented to the reader in an intuitive manner. Right now these figures require significant parsing to make sense of.

> Done. The main tables carry all the relevant information. With the other changes we have made these results are much more obvious in the main tables, which are a proxy for the "hero figure"

REVIEWER 2

Summary:
"Modeling Decanalization with Homeostatic Reinforcement Learning", introduces a computational framework designed to formalize long-standing theoretical concepts in psychology, neuroscience, and integrative psychotherapy. Living organisms often rely on habituated or entrenched behavioral repertoires to manage internal setpoints, but in clinical conditions such as depression, anxiety, PTSD, or substance use disorders, these behavioral patterns can become rigidly fixed—a phenomenon conceptualized as hypercanalization. While therapeutic interventions like psychedelic-assisted therapy or targeted stimulus regimes are increasingly used to transiently break these entrenched loops and allow healthier behaviors to stabilize, these dynamics of canalization, decanalization, and recanalization have historically remained qualitative metaphors. The authors address this theoretical gap by constructing an explicit agent-based model to test whether and how temporary behavioral destabilization can lead to more adaptive behavioral patterns.

Review:
This is a very well-written and we-reasoned manuscript, and would be a valuable contribution to the field if published as is. Below I offer some suggestions which I hope may be helpful to the authors in some capacity, whether for this or for future work.

“Canalization and plasticity in psychopathology” is a highly problematic paper, in that it claims that the “first principal component” of psychopathology is rigidity due to excessively canalized (expected) free energy landscapes, when a more accurate/grounding of the literature suggests the situation is precisely the opposite: As a conjunction of low Conscientiousness, low Agreeableness, and high Neuroticism, the Pfactors is actually the inverse of the Big-5 meta-trait of “Stability”, which may be understood as lack of well-configured (for life) characteristic adaptations. Alternatively, the P-factor could be understood as a deficit with respect to positive/adaptive canalization, which seems highly consistent with the findings described in this manuscript.

Integrating Cybernetic Big Five Theory with the free energy principle: A new strategy for modeling personalities as complex systems

> Done.

Towards Understanding Persons and Their Personalities with Cybernetic Big 5 Theory and the Free Energy Principle and Active Inference (FEP-AI) Framework

Robin is not incorrect in pointing out the dangers of excessive rigidity via maladaptive canalization. However, it would be more accurate (even if less satisfying/aggrandizing) to refer to this as the “second principal component” of psychopathology.

> Done. Should be clear we're not treating excessive rigidity as the principal component.

While we’re attempting to correct for overly simplified (over-reaching) models, in discussing altered beliefs under psychedelics, it could be worth mentioning this work which suggests we ought to expect combinations of both directly and indirectly relaxed and strengthened beliefs at different levels of neural hierarchies:

On the varieties of conscious experiences: Altered Beliefs Under Psychedelics (ALBUS) | Neuroscience of Consciousness

> Done.

Another question I had in reading this manuscript was the extent to which these findings could be used to understand the natural/normative functioning of psychedelic-like transformative experiences as described in the excellent work of Ari Brouwer:

Pivotal mental states

The Temporal Trajectory of the Psychedelic Mushroom Experience Mimics the Narrative Arc of the Hero’s Journey

> TODO: add to discussion

OTHER

- If all you do is turn the ac or heater on, and not both, you won't do as well as if you have.

- Clarity on unique pellets. Non-unique of circling around and getting it again.  Value as an indirect indicator of exploration. If low it finds reward and circles back. Add this to interpretation of unique pellet.s

- Collapse h lost and h gained into one

- Figure 4 make clear it's just a baseline comparison. Either improve the figures so it's clear how to get the table numbers by looking at the graph, or just remove these figures altogether.
